So I haven't done any homework.
Oh, okay.
You're not supposed to.
Good.
All right.
Let's just make sure that it's down there.
We're running.
Thank you very much.
So you're finishing up Virgil now?
I guess we'll... We're finishing up with a little premature.
I hope to get what I'd call a working draft of the poem in just the poem itself by the end of summer or the beginning of fall after several years of work.
But if I can get a working draft, that's when the hard hammering really begins.
So I can't really say when it's going to be, and not least because I'm working with Bernard Knox, and Bernard is responsible as he was for the Iliad and the Odyssey, the introduction, the notes, the glossary.
So it's still a way to go.
This is really one of those extraordinary instances, I think, in recent literary history where the teacher, the mentor,
continues to work so closely.
I think you're right.
I think it is unusual.
And to speak from my point of view, it's an absolute blessing.
My working relationship, my friendship with Bernard is one of the great privileges in my life.
I count myself very fortunate indeed.
Did you think of him as your primary reader?
And I ask this with understanding, with the knowledge that you produce these magnificent translations which become bestsellers, which have resonance among a general readership, not just an academic or a scholarly.
Well, one of the beauties of having Bernard as a reader, maybe one of the main readers, is that he knows the Greek text and now the Latin text by heart.
But he also knows by heart the modern literature and what the demands of modern English might be.
But Bernard is not my only reader.
In fact, I turn often first to my wife, the muse herself, and to my children too, so that though I go to few readers at the outset, the spread of reader from the generalist to the specialist is pretty broad.
And I've just been handing a draft of this book or that book out to some good friends I know who are as often as not poets and novelists as they are professional classicists.
Again, I like to keep the base broad.
Is there an ideal reader?
Keeping in mind that you like to keep the base broad, but these are the readers of first resort, obviously.
I think that's the way to put it.
They are the readers of first resort.
A handful of them.
I think the ideal leader is somebody who's interested in this story and alive to the kind of life you're trying to lend this story.
And I don't know how much it depends.
I used to think it depended a great deal on education, even sociological background.
But the more I see the way the Iliad and the Odyssey have caught on in many younger grades throughout the country,
the less convinced I am that the audience has to be that elite or selective.
So I still, I come out a strong believer in, quote, the common reader.
And for all of the wringing of hands among specialists, that the literacy of the republic has gone to hell.
I'm much encouraged by the literacy of the great republic.
I think it's a lot broader, a lot healthier, a lot more inquisitive than many people have thought.
Will it be?
Will you be curious?
I mean, your previous books, your best-known books, certainly were translations from the Greek.
Now we're going into an area that some people regard as, you know, with quotation marks heavily around it, a dead language.
Well, my answer to that is that there was a wonderful chairman of the classics department here, Jim Luce,
who for years had a sign on his door saying, the only good language is a dead language.
Stein John Wayne, which I think is pretty good.
Is that an accurate quote of Wayne?
Did he actually say that?
No, no, no.
He didn't say it, but it's the kind of thing he would say I'm afraid he would say is English.
The only good language is a dead language.
How did this professor spell his name?
How do you see he?
Lou James P.
loose l-u-c yeah good okay that's uh you even quoted elsewhere you may even have mentioned to me when we spoke in 1997 that you that you often turn to modern poets poets for inspiration well if i can put it this way in front of me when i was in front of me on my desk as a translator i keep two big books the first big book is
say the text of Homer or the text of Virgil, with all the lexicons and the commentaries.
And on the other hand, and I mean the right hand, say, is the big book of modern verse, English verse.
And I try to keep the two in tandem because I think I've got a dual kind of responsibility.
One is to the ancient text and the other is to the modern reader.
I try, as I say, to keep the two in balance.
They don't always work in balance, but I do the best I can with that.
Now, do you dip, or do you have specific poets who are... Well, some of the ones I read a lot are good friends of mine.
Charlie Williams, Paul Muldoon, Dan Halperin,
Seamus Heaney, who I'm getting to know and like even more.
And of course, his Beowulf is another classic.
A wonderful bestseller.
Yeah, you talk about Beowulf as a bestseller.
It's really quite astounding, isn't it?
It is astounding.
It's not so astounding that an Odyssey would be a bestseller, because the Odyssey's always been with us.
But Beowulf has remained a little snarly and distant.
But Seamus really brought it home.
Now, this raises a question.
With Seamus...
a great poet in his own right.
And for those who are not familiar with the Old English of Beowulf, I think it's Old English, right?
It is, yeah.
Does this become a new work of art?
I think if a translation, it is really a serious piece of translation, becomes a new work of art.
Becomes, that is, a new interpretation, an adaptation, a revision, sometimes drastically,
sometimes very slight.
But it's a transplant in some way.
It's been carried over to a new language, a new time, a new culture.
And I think that means invariably that it's not the same as the original was.
The original becomes the translation.
So those who don't speak Greek or don't speak Old English, and there are many of us,
Well, I mean, I even read a piece, I forget where, but how the Scott Moncrief translation of Proust, for instance, to English-speaking readers, that's Proust.
Yes, exactly.
And Pope's Homer, done in the first part of the 18th century, was really Homer for about 150 years.
A flawed Homer, in your view?
Pardon me?
A flawed Homer?
Homer for its times.
Well, I think of Homer for its many times, and I'm thinking of his Iliad rather than his Odyssey, which is a lesser production.
But the Iliad is truly a great English poem of the stature of Milton's Paradise Lost, or Spencer's Fairy Queen, or Dryden's translation of Virgil's Aeneid.
The great, sturdy English poems in their own right.
Our mode of translation is much less radical than Pope's was, or Dryden's was.
And we have an appreciation and respect for historicity, the so-called accuracy in Homer's portrayal of not his time, but a time about 500 years prior to him.
That we stand much closer to the text, if we're translators.
If we're bold adapters like Joyce, we can stand inside the text of Homer, or miles outside, all the way to Edwardian Dublin.
But that's another kind of translation, and a very great one.
I think you had mentioned earlier that you went to Amherst.
I know you weren't intending to pursue a career in the classics, I guess.
No, I entered Amherst in 51.
And I was pre-med there for the first couple of years.
You talk about a switch.
God, that is a switch.
It really is.
But there have been a lot of poets who have been doctors and doctors who have been poets.
Well, I'm seeing Robert Coles tomorrow morning.
Oh, great.
How lucky for the two of you.
Yeah, thank you.
But John Keats was an example.
Exactly.
So there's... William Carlos Williams.
I'm Carlos Williams ever known as an obstetrician.
Walker Percy, one of my favorites.
Sure, you bet.
So...
I'm not sure what the literal connection is, but it seems to work, bringing something to birth in some way or other, or safeguarding some kind of life or vitality.
And then there was a radical switch for me halfway through Amherst, and my love of language, love of literature caught up with me and wouldn't be put down.
So when I entered my junior year of Amherst, I guess it was,
I began to learn Greek, began to learn Latin.
I came to those ancient languages late, but I went with what Vinnie Lombardius referred to as desire.
I had a lot of it.
Now, you learn these languages in courses at Amherst?
That's right.
Okay.
And with the specific intention of being able to read these classics in their original languages?
I think that's probably the nutshell.
I think that's it in a nutshell.
I had never had much exposure, if any, to classical literature or classical masterworks when I was in senior high school.
My first exposure came in the first couple of years at Amherst.
Well, we had, in effect, the great book sequence.
And that was my first introduction.
And I want to come back to that, by the way.
Yeah, me too.
Go ahead, please.
And so my first exposure was through translation.
I probably read, in fact, I know I read Latimer's Iliad.
I'm not sure what Odyssey I would have read.
It could have been Reuse Penguin Prose Version, an old standby.
Uh...
And I, like many others of my generation and generations to come, fell in love with these things through excellent translations and thought how wonderful it would be to get the beauty of it hot, to go back to the source itself.
And so many of us began to learn those languages if we didn't have them before.
And I don't think that I went at it with the desire of becoming a translator.
I didn't know that at the time.
But I simply wanted to come
to get as close as I possibly could to Homer's Iliad and Odyssey, Virgil's Aeneid, many other things, and Greek tragedy.
That was my goal at that point.
And it wasn't until a little later, I guess, this year when I was a graduate student in English, that it began to cross my mind, wouldn't it be wonderful at least to try to re-embody these things in my own language?
That might be the greatest kind of...
That would be the strongest demonstration of my affection for them, my affiliation with them, my feeling for them.
Were you thinking of sharing this with others at this point, or was this merely for yourself?
I think this was strictly for myself and for a drawer.
I had no notion of how to share these things.
I had no notion if I could do it in the first place.
And it wasn't until a little later that I got up to gumption, some outrageous gumption.
In fact, the first book I translated was a Greek-rated poet named Achilles.
And they all brought it back into print, I'm glad to say.
Oh, that's wonderful.
They had published it in 61 and brought it back about half a dozen years ago or more.
And how did this text survive most of them?
It survived in a pot in Egypt and the Nile Delta.
Wow.
Yeah.
In other words, by sheer dumb, blind luck.
Is this one of those oxyrhynchus?
No, it wasn't an oxyrhynchus, but it was really remote.
Very remote.
And it's one of those... One of those miracles.
Yeah, one of those miracles.
Exactly.
Sometimes we're treated to those miracles.
and think how many miracles we've lacked along the way.
Exactly.
But that was the first.
And I went at it for the very simple reasons that I'd fallen in love with the poetry in Greek and wanted to see if I could turn it into English.
My translations from Homer begin really, as a matter of fact, with my mother's death.
She died in 76.
And it fell to me as it falls to many of us to put together a program of readings of some sort for friends, relatives, whatever.
And the first text that left to mind was that marvelous scene in the 11th book of the Odyssey, where Odysseus confronts the ghost of his mother, tries to embrace her three times and fails, and his heart is broken.
That's the text that came to mind, the first one I wanted to read.
I hadn't translated it myself, and I was too discombobulated at that point.
try my hand at it, so I went to Robert Fitzgerald's wonderful version of it and read that.
Then in the few weeks following, when I began to gather myself again, I tried my own hand at it.
And that was when and where I began to translate Homer.
I'm sorry.
No, that's all right.
Are there days where you actually will labor an entire day over the choice of a single word?
There's always that kind of day.
And is that word worth it, in your view?
If you hit it, it's worth it.
If you miss it, it breaks the heart.
But you only discovered that afterwards, right?
Oh, sure.
I remember somebody was questioning you about the way you opened the Iliad, you know, rage.
Yes, that's right.
And how you were just filled with so many anxious moments.
I mean, we talked about the foundation poem of Western civilization.
And it begins with anger rather than rationality.
But you thought that out, didn't you?
I had to fight that out, yeah.
And in fact, that was one case in which the English translator has some love that the Greek
The original Greek is not.
The first word of the Iliad is manin, from which we get mania, or rage.
And in English, rather than in Greek, in English that can become a noun, or it can become an imperative.
And I use it both ways in the first word of that poem.
Rage.
Sing the rage.
Goddess, sing the rage of Peleus son Achilles.
In other words, let rage be your subject, and you go ahead and rage at the same time, please.
So it's both of urban and noun.
It's not that in classical Greek or Homeric Greek, but it is in English, and I thought that was the only way I could do it.
Would it help you as a scholar to know when you're dealing with other people who interest you what their reading habits are or what...
I think it would help.
It would help me to understand a better notion of what general literacy is in the United States
at the turn of the millennium.
At the same time, I could get stuck badly, too.
In other words, if I found out, and I wouldn't be surprised if I did find out, that Shakespeare was on the minds or ears of many, I might be tempted to imitate Shakespeare.
And that would be a dead end if there ever was one, for me at least.
So there are certain risks... That's right.
I have a good friend who translates from Russian, Clarence Brown.
And we had talked about this kind of thing.
And he asked me, Bob, are there any dangerous poets?
I said, what do you mean by dangerous poets, C.B., Clarence?
I said poets who are so close to what you ought to do that if you get too close to them, you end up imitating them.
And I think that Shakespeare would be that danger for me.
And so I've always given Shakespeare a wide berth when it comes to my work as a translator.
As a reader, I'm reading him all the time.
I want to find him that dangerous in terms of posing a danger to those who read.
Well, I think there's no question of that.
Blake said of the classics, but with pointed reference to Homer, it is the classics, the classics that desolate Europe with wars.
Blake said that.
Yeah, and I think he...
I think he saw something very clearly.
There are certain poems which are dangerous poems that tend to let loose sources of human energy which are often ungoverned.
Can you think of a few examples?
Yeah, Homer's Iliad.
I think Homer's Iliad is a real dangerous poem.
Unless you read it all, and I don't mean all 24 books, I mean if you respond to every aspect of it.
Because if you do...
then I think you begin to feel that Homer's Iliad is a cruel poem, a relentlessly cruel poem, but it's also a very compassionate one.
And there must be some symbiosis going on there between the ferocity of the poetry and the feeling of compassion that it often rouses in people.
It's that old paradox which is, I think, always with us.
Remember the refrain in Yeats's Easter 1916, All change changed utterly.
A terrible beauty is born.
Terrible beauty, yeah.
Terrible beauty.
That phrase summarizes it all, I think.
The Iliad is a terrible beauty.
Whether both things are held in tandem and are equal forces, I'm not sure.
But one gives rise to the other.
Do you think it's this terrible beauty then, partially at least?
that explains the seductive power of that poem.
I mean, I think it's got to be the most translated poem over the years.
I think that's probably true, Nate.
And I do think it has a great deal to do with its appeal.
I might almost say, whether we know it or not, there's a tremendous forward drive in that poem.
There's an engine driving that poem.
And it's not all toward cruelty.
It's toward human feeling, too.
For people who suggest that, I mean, again, to go back to the horrible phrase, a dead language, Latin is not taught anymore.
Greek is hardly ever taught anymore.
And then you wonder why when you read Lincoln, you see him quoting Roman authors.
Sure do.
And Jefferson.
And Jefferson and Emerson.
All of them.
And all of them.
And are we missing that today?
And yet I ask, do the classics still resonate today?
Oh, I certainly think so.
I think more and more.
And it may be that I'm speaking from a very privileged institution, but there's no shortage among the people I've taught for more than 40 years here at Princeton.
No, no shortage of people who
either come equipped with some classical language or are hungry for it.
And I think it goes beyond Princeton.
I find it on my email.
I find it in my first-class mail.
Readers from afar, in some far north of this country, want a guy who rode a bicycle 40 miles to get to the public library to read my Odyssey.
I'm assuming myself, I'm talking about
his hunger to get acquainted with that poem, other gestures like that, actions like that.
I don't think it's limited to Princeton University.
I think there's a lot of hunger, inquisitiveness, curiosity, and it may even suggest that what they have as common fare for reading doesn't satisfy them quite as much as something classical may.
At least they're willing to give it a try.
And they're willing to give it a try in great and encouraging numbers,
I find it one of the most heartening experiences I've ever had.
You know, that people are reading these things.
You used a phrase in the New York Times interview with Mel Cusso.
What so?
In 1997.
You're not mocking, but certainly mindful of the actions of the translation police.
Yeah.
And I wonder if you could give me a little riff on that, what you were driving at there.
Well, I better not stress that too much unless they get me.
I think that there are some people who regard translation as a word-by-word enterprise.
In other words, they will tend to judge a translation on whether the translation captures this word or that word out of 10,000 words and fail, I think, to see the overall picture that a translator is trying to draw
the big work and verse paragraphs, the shape he or she will give to an entire book in Homer, the tone of speech that you adopt in translating Nestor on the one hand, Helen of Troy on the other.
In other words, it's a forest, it's a trees for forest problem.
I think it can be a tendency to get lost in the individual branches and not see the forest whole.
And if translation is as original or originating an activity as I like to think it is, then you owe it to the serious translation to take the whole sweep of it.
Get the feeling of the entire piece of work.
The translation police, by the way, are extremely valuable.
because they help me at any rate, so far as I know them or sense them in the darkness.
They help me know that I have a real responsibility to an ancient text, to be as close to it, as accurate as I can possibly be.
At the same time, I want to express a modern vision of it.
So some of my best friends are translation policemen.
That's a great quote, by the way, especially for me, where you
The fidelity that you feel, the obligation, the responsibility to the original text, you are making a work that you hope, you are creating a work that you hope is accessible to modern audiences.
By the way, I have the transcript of the interview that you and I had in IT.E.
Oh, I like that.
And if you don't mind, I will draw from that as well.
Ew.
There are a lot of questions that I would have been asking you today that we went over seven years ago, and you answered beautifully, and I'm assuming those answers still apply today, right?
I bet they do.
Yeah.
I mean, you know, anytime you like.
Yeah, well, I mean, for instance, one question, which the great book, great book,
um item that you you raised a few minutes ago we kind of touched on in that earlier interview when i asked you how you feel when you hear that a college like hammers where you where you went to school or even princeton or brown they don't require don't require english majors you know to study shakespeare or spencer or or milton
And you responded, well, you certainly hope.
But the question is, have you read Shakespeare?
Have you read Spencer?
You know, the greater question is, I mean, when we get a student at this level, sure, we don't require it.
We require it, but we certainly expect it.
We certainly hope like hell for it.
We hope like hell for it.
But can you imagine somebody getting a degree in English literature?
who hasn't read Shakespeare?
I guess it can be done, and I don't want to think of it.
But it's a horrible thought, isn't it?
It is a horrible thought.
What are the underpinnings?
What is the notion of the source of their language they speak?
But then you think about the translation police, but then there are also the culture police.
Absolutely.
And then I guess this does kind of segue you nicely into the whole great book's core question, and I wonder how you weigh in on that.
I think it's essential.
And I think that we should not worry too much about the canon.
The canon will always be shifting.
The canon is something living.
It's growing.
It's not steady.
It's stable.
And worry more on the effectiveness with which these great things are taught.
We can always quarrel about what titles should be included.
But what you can't quarrel about, I think, is the figure with which these things are felt.
That word was bigger?
Bigger.
Okay.
In which they're felt.
Transmitted, I might as well say translated.
I'll tell you, there was an interview with me by Chris Hedges in the New York Times not so long ago.
April?
Yes, April.
I have it, yeah.
Okay.
And again, I'm not covering territory that you cover because... Oh, feel free.
Well, I mean, you've got it there.
I mean, you've covered it, and I'm trying to get to areas that I don't have.
Please do.
But the great book's curriculum, the great book's debate... Yes.
So you do... I come down very heavily, see, in favor of it.
And...
I suppose when it comes to the choice of particular titles, particular translations, there's a great deal of room for debate.
But I think it's awfully important, especially for younger people, to realize that when they read a writer of the stature of James Joyce, say, there's something beyond that.
James Joyce is part of a great unfolding tradition of, say, adaptations of Homer.
And it gives you a feeling of continuity with the past, of where you come from.
It also may open your eyes, as a young reader, to the struggle that it represents to be a writer, to get words down on paper, to see the sweat involved, to see the originality involved, the pressure.
You know, when you mention James Joyce and you mention Ulysses, of course, this was the 100th year of Bloomsday.
It was.
And there were fabulous stories, which I...
Google, I have to say, is something you could just do a search and see what they're saying all over the world.
Isn't it wonderful?
All over the world, you know, about Bloomsday or whatever.
You know, seeing what they've been saying about Fahrenheit 9-11.
You're not going to have a fault like that.
All of it.
Very, very interesting.
My daughter and I were among those who started an opening day, by the way.
And I want to see what's going on.
But when we think of Joyce and Ulysses, one little nugget that came out from
maybe 25 different stories that I read is that this is easily the most celebrated literary day in the world on the one hand, and yet perhaps four or five percent of the people, if that many, who are celebrating it haven't read the book.
It's a wonderful thing in some ways.
I wish that everyone would read the book always.
I'm a reader and a writer and a teacher.
But it's wonderful that a book can still gain that kind of prestige and preeminence.
even if it's based on ignorance.
I don't want to peddle ignorance, but I guess what we retain is a kind of belief in the authority of print, which is not a bad thing, as long as the print is holding something well-written, well-thought-out.
on the side of the better angels rather than the worse.
Well, and I guess there is a parallel question here.
When we talk about the role of the translator as the interpreter, as the filter between the reader and the original text, you wonder almost if... I did an interview with Norman Mailer many years ago, and I forget how Joyce came up.
He was quoting Joyce and Ulysses, and I asked him,
something about the novel.
Well, to tell you the truth, I haven't read the novel.
All I know about it, he said, is what I get from Elman.
But that's not bad.
But again, as you say, we are relying on a filter here, aren't we?
We are.
And it means that the filter has an awesome kind of responsibility about him or her.
And I often feel, I often wonder while I'm working on a Virgil or a Homer or a Sophocles, who the devil am I to be
to put my hands on these things.
There's an almost embarrassing kind of arrogance involved in it, as well as the opposite feeling of being chastened and humbled by the greatness of what you're trying to deal with.
So there's a great weight of responsibility and a great buoyancy of spirit, too.
The more I work with Homer and especially the battle scenes, I think,
The more I was struck by this weight of responsibility, the more painful it became.
And yet at the same time, the more uplifting, ennobling it became as well.
It was a terrible beauty.
I was experiencing a terrible beauty.
That's wonderful.
Line by line.
We did talk about Beowulf.
I think we did.
We talked about Proust.
What was that one?
Oh, yeah.
An interview I had with Helen Wendler a couple of weeks ago.
And my question for Helen was...
Good people.
Christopher Ricks, we're talking about Robert Coles.
I'm so excited about the lineup of people.
Just people that I have total respect for.
And the beauty of you is that
You know, we've had several conversations over a period of years.
Harold Bloom, I've done four interviews with over the years.
Have you seen what's changed in Harold?
You know, I haven't seen him in about four years, so I'm about to set that one up, and I was just going through the transcripts for those interviews, and I've kept them all over 30 years.
I bet you did.
They really are good.
A couple of universities want them, which is kind of interesting.
kind of encouraging.
But Helen, I asked Helen, how does a canon come to be formed?
Who is it that decides that something is... Who are the umpires?
Who are the umpires?
And she said other writers.
I think that is also true.
At the same time, I wouldn't want to leave it only to the writers.
Or rather, I wouldn't want to leave out the great readers either.
I've got two daughters who are wonderful readers, but they don't want to study literature.
One's a doctor and the other's a marketing analyst.
They remain among the best readers I've ever met, and their reactions to my work are very precious, not simply because I'm a doting father, but because they have a freshness about them.
They don't have many filters between themselves and the book itself.
They can come at it head on.
not deflected by this scholarship or that school or whatever and uh there are many people i've met many great readers in my day my wife is a great reader first and foremost she is the great reader and she's full of responses to what she's reading um maybe you could just define in your view what makes a great reader i think
Let me quote you a phrase from Virginia Woolf.
Virginia Woolf wrote a wonderful essay which you may know called On Not Knowing Greek.
I forget if it's in the first common reader or the second common reader, but we can find it if we need it.
And she says of the people in Homer about the lives they lead.
This may seem a roundabout way of answering your question, but I'll get there.
He says, and I don't have it in front of me, I'm quoting from memory.
And not to worry.
Okay.
With down to the sea in their ears, vines, meadows, rivulets around them, they are even more aware than we are of a ruthless fate.
There is a sadness at the back of life which they do not attempt to mitigate.
Entirely aware of their own standing in the shadow, and yet alive to every tremor and gleam of existence,
There they endure.
That's vintage Virginia.
It's Homer through and through.
And it helps me define or suggest what the ideal reader is.
Entirely aware of our own standing in the shadow and yet alive to every tremor and gleam of existence.
There they endure.
That being alive to every tremor and gleam of existence.
That's what a great reader has in plenty, I think.
A great writer does too, of course.
But I don't think it should be limited to writers.
I think there are readers who have this.
And then before I interrupt you, just swing back to where you were talking about your reliance on your wife and your daughters as great readers and the formation of canons.
And I know I interrupted you.
I apologize.
No, no, no.
I didn't want to lose that thought on the great reader.
If you might, just continuing with that thought that you had.
For sure.
I think that you form a canon, a writer will form a canon probably based on the writers who have helped him.
been most influential to him or her.
A reader in some ways may have less of an axe to grind, may be less utilitarian about what
He or she is leaning.
Carrying less baggage.
That's good.
Whose phrase is that?
I don't know whose it is.
Better than grinding, actually.
You're bringing nothing to the table except your own interests.
That's right.
You're not trying to bully the text in the submission.
You're not trying to squeeze it to get a piece of your own workout.
Or it's when some publication engages another translator to do a review of one of your books, especially when it works in Greek.
That's right.
Exactly.
Well, what are they bringing to the table here?
And so you do have to have, and I as a reader, an appreciative
reader of reviews, but always with qualifications and reservations.
That's right.
You know, what's the subtext here?
Sure.
What's going on?
I think to follow up Helen's good suggestion, however, it'd be interesting, and maybe it's been done many times, to pick ten or dozen writers and have them, each of them, submit a canon.
There's half a dozen things that they would like to be, what is it, on a desert island with, on one's deathbed with,
and so forth, the ultimate choices that they would make, and see the differences between the canon submitted by each of those ten a dozen writers, see what they have in common, what they don't have in common, what their choices say about their own work and their own hopes for an audience.
Firstly, just a thing.
But I do think that canon formation should lie not only in the hands of the creator, but in the hands of the receiver, too.
I'm just finishing a chapter that I've had the greatest fun with in this new book.
This is the first book that I'm
researching and writing at the same time.
It's kind of fun.
And of course, there's always ample opportunity to go back and to rethink and to revise.
But I'm writing one chapter where I begin with the great Printing in the Mind of Man exhibition in England in 1963.
And of course, these were all books that were perceived to have changed the world.
It really did give me the premise for this book.
And so I decided to see how many different exhibitions or books that I could find where they have put together these lists.
You know, the Malcolm Cowley book, 1937 books that shaped the way we think.
The Groyer Club, 100 most influential books in America prior to 1900, you know.
But there was one book I found, an obscure book in a second-hand bookstore.
I paid $2 for it.
And it's the greatest books of our time, published in 1926.
And it's the first quarter of the 20th century.
And he said, no book can get in here unless it has at least four sponsors.
and the sponsors are the reviews, and they have famous critics of the period.
And he gives us a thousand books, and he gives even little snippets of the reviews.
He even gives you the number of votes, the various... But would you be amazed at the books that you would never even know exist today?
And then you see down at the bottom people like Proust, people like Einstein.
It's astonishing.
And I wrote this up, and again...
like the classics.
That's quite fascinating.
I think we need time, you know.
We do.
And it's not just other writers giving their approbation.
Not at all.
It's really what does survive over the long haul.
It does.
And it's not only in the hands of the artists.
It is.
Isn't that, I hadn't thought of that.
It should be in the hands of artists, true, but why not statesmen?
Why not physicians?
We've talked about the ligature between medicine and literature.
That's really one of the reasons I want to talk to Coles again tomorrow.
I would.
He'd be an expert at that.
And he really is.
But this has been a lot of fun, that particular chapter to write.
I'm just wrapping it up.
And then there was this great Roger exhibition where the committee was supposed to come up with 100 books.
They couldn't agree.
I mean, they agreed on the Declaration of Independence, on the Gettysburg Address.
The Gettysburg Address.
And the second inaugural, I hope.
Well, no, not the second inaugural, but you know they had in there not the Sears Roebuck catalog.
These are the most influential books.
Not the greatest, but the most influential.
Well, I guess maybe that's the point, too.
Forget the arguments about title by title.
and simply get on your knees in front of the influence of the text itself, or a text itself.
Exactly.
It's a great tribute to literacy.
You know, we've done about 45 minutes, and I think that I don't want you to lose your voice entirely.
I enjoy this very much.
What I would like to do is to transcribe this, absorb it, to take a look at it, and collate it with my other stuff.
And then perhaps get back to you at some point.
And if you have another three quarters of an hour, if you don't mind, we can pick up.
We'll find because I find this very interesting and a lot of fun.
This has been fabulous.
So please give me a call when you're in shape to do a little more work together.
Sounds wonderful, sir.
Please, and by all means, if you think that we ought to meet head-to-head... I'd like to do that, actually.
I do want to come down to that.
I've not yet met Elaine Pagels, and I believe... Oh, you must do that.
She's a great person.
You wouldn't know she's around this summer.
I just saw her last night than the night before.
Oh, good, so she is around.
I think that she's around this summer, but I can't swear to it.
Excellent.
So what I will try to do is arrange something with her...
and then maybe we could chat for a few minutes.
I'd love to shoot some photographs.
What I'd also like to do is send you a copy of my
New book.
Great.
It's had a lovely review on the Times Literary supplement a couple weeks ago.
The woodwork was very nice.
And I'd love for you to sit so you can see what I'm doing.
Who is your editor at HarperCollins?
Hugh Van Dusen?
Yes, I know him by name.
He's been around for ages.
He's Harper Lee's editor.
Oh, great.
I guess I'm still waiting for the next book.
And Jacques Barzen's editor.
I feel like I'm in pretty good company.
Worthy company.
That's fine.
Cool.
Call me whenever you like.
Thank you, sir.
Okay.
Have a nice weekend and a great holiday.
Thanks a lot.
Bye-bye.